Subscribe to GroundUp’s Newsletter Michael Komape fell into a pit toilet at his school on 20 January 2014, and drowned. His parents are suing the state. GroundUp is covering every day of the trial. Here is the latest report:
State offered a pauper’s burial for Michael Komape Here are reports from the rest of the trial. This is a wonderful story of hope: Meet Masiphumele’s budding violinists. Our photographer in Harare (who wants to remain anonymous) captured the past week’s seminal events beautifully. Here are photos from what some protesters called Zimbabwe’s second independence day. He caught on camera students shutting down the University of Zimbabwe. And he also shot the celebrations when Mugabe finally resigned. Activists are campaigning for affordable housing. We took an in-depth look at one particular model: state-subsidised rentals. These are generally for households earning too much to qualify for RDP housing, but too little to afford private sector rents. A day after publishing this report, evictions took place at Steenvilla, the biggest rent-based social housing project in Cape Town. Remember the fire in Hout Bay’s Imizamo Yethu township earlier this year? The City of Cape Town promised to reblock the burnt area. It isn’t going well. Last week we ran an opinion piece by a Woodstock resident Ute Kuhlmannquestioning the City’s approach to affordable housing in the area. Here is a response by Nick Budlender of Ndifuna Ukwazi. It’s a fascinating and important debate, well worth reading. The travails of PRASA and Metrorail continue. This week the Railway Safety Regulator released a damning report about train safety. Commuters were stranded for two hours between stations on Cape Town Metrorail earlier this week. It’s true this is not unusual, but we intend to report incidents like this regularly so that the terrible state of Cape Town’s train transport system remains in the public eye. Friday (the day you receive this email) is supposed to be the day that a deal between SASSA and the Post Office will be reached to pay social grants. Two years ago we reported how it had taken many years and far too much money for Butterworth’s public pool to be built. The good news is that the pool has been built. The bad news is that there isn’t water to fill it. Five years ago we reported the opening of the Department of Coffee in Khayelitsha. Sadly this week we report its closure, hopefully temporary, following the burglary of their machines. The popular baristas are appealing for financial help to get their business going again. “My stomach turns and I feel as if I’m about to vomit” By Vincent Lali Committee demands clarity on costs but gets none By Suné Payne Case on SAPS resources will be heard next week By Tariro Washinyira Residents accuse municipality of neglect, while councillor says residents must clean their own mess By Nomfundo Xolo Dispute on Eastern Cape farm after video shows farmer pulling down family’s home extension. By Joseph Chirume SAHRC says it wants to be “more accessible” to people living far from big cities By Barbara Maregele Khululabantu Bam centre in Butterworth described as “not appropriate” for mentally ill By Nombulelo Damba-Hendrik Showdown looms as residents demand timeframes but Xola Pakati refuses to give any. By Thembela Ntongana Chamber of Mines fails to block activists from taking part in upcoming court case By Ohene Yaw Ampofo-Anti City says it will cost one million rand and take three years to restore By Vincent Lali Nelson Mandela Bay Municipality says supply to poor areas is being sabotaged on weekends By Joseph Chirume