Protesters blocked all entrances and exits out of Davidsonville, Roodepoort on Monday using burning tyres and rocks. Police also sealed off the main roads leading into the area to prevent passing vehicles from getting damaged in the protest.Residents claimed they received notifications that their water and electricity was to be cut off. This triggered the early morning protest. Running battles between protesters and police carried on for most of the day. Police fired tear gas and rubber bullets in an attempt to push protesters back into the township. Protesters climbed a disused mine dump and retaliated with stones and petrol bombs.The councillor for the area, Ren Benjamin, was brought in by police to listen to the demands of the residents. These included concerns over electricity bills, maintenance of infrastructure and garbage collection. Benjamin said the mayoral committee was considering the request to scrap outstanding electricity bills for poor communities but no decisions has been made. Benjamin said that the electricity termination notices were generated incorrectly by the billing system and that there is a no disconnection policy for Davidsonville which means that no one will be disconnected from water and electricity in the area.She also said that concerns over outstanding title deeds has been escalated to the Department of Housing. Community leader Christebell Pienaar gave the councillor 24 hours to meet with relevant authorities and get back to the community with solutions to their challenges. We ve been waiting 25 years for services and so we give you 24 hours for you to come back to us with a response in writing, said Pienaar. Our people need an answer here. If you can t do it in 24 hours, this protest will become more and more trouble and we will reach a point where people will die here, said a community member as he addressed the councillor before she left. Benjamin said she would take the community s concerns to the mayoral committee and ask for a written response.