As the Cape Town International Jazz Festival came to an end this weekend, another group of jazz enthusiasts from Khayelitsha were showing their skills to American pianist and composer, Nat Adderley Jr.Best known for his work with Luther Vandross, Adderley Jr. will be sharing his skills with young musicians across Cape Town. On Sunday, some teens from the Khayelitsha music group freestyled alongside the pianist during a workshop held at Jazz in the Native Yard in Gugulethu.High school student Esihle Valela does a solo. Video: Ashraf HendricksThe group of mostly high school students attend classes at the Eluxolweni Primary School every Saturday. Members of the community were seen peering into the venue as the sound of the trumpets and saxophones echoed through NY138.After the workshop, 14-year old trumpet player, Anita, said she learnt a lot from her brief lesson with Adderley Jr. She joined the music group in Grade 5 and loves learning new scores . I love being part of the band because it keeps me busy as a teenager. I don t want to end up like many other teenagers in my community, she said. Anita, a big Hugh Masekela fan, said her dream is to work as a professional musician or a music teacher.Babalwa Meintjies, a music teacher with the group, said the learners are taught how to read music and to play the brass instruments by local musicians. Most of the children think of jazz music as something they just see on TV. Now, the programme has changed this. When you put a score in front of them, it s great to see children from the townships being able to read it, she said.Adderley Jr. said he jumped at the opportunity to do workshops with youth from poor communities. These kids have got something, he said after his workshop with the group from Khayelitsha. They learnt something about some theory that they can identify and apply to any other chord they play. My message to young musicians is to take every chance you get to learn. These kids I just worked with have a lot of potential, he said.Adderley Jr will this week be doing workshops. He will be playing with a young minstrel troupe from Hanover Park, the Delft Big Band, and youth groups from Gugulethu.