Bromwell Street families facing eviction from their Woodstock homes say they will be left unemployed and their children without schools, should they be relocated to Wolwerivier. We went to Wolwerivier last year and there is no life there. Most of us work night shift at places in the area, so if we have to move far away, we ll lose our jobs, said tenant Charnell Commando.In 2013 a company called The Woodstock Hub bought the properties where the group live. Tenants lost an appeal over the recent eviction order, and previously had until 9 September to move out. The families then filed an urgent application in the High Court to halt the eviction. While that application was unsuccessful, the court ruled on the City s obligation to provide the tenants with emergency alternative accommodation.In the City s answering affidavit, the acting executive director of Human Settlements, Riana Pretorius, expressed concern that the Bromwell Street residents should not set a precedent for jumping the housing queue.Now Bromwell Street residents are rejecting the City s proposal to relocate them to Wolwerivier, situated near Melkbos Strand, about 25km north of the city centre with distant access to services like schools and clinics. It is considered a temporary relocation area as opposed to subsidised housing. Commando is among a group of ten households that do not qualify for subsidised housing and this is why the City has proposed Wolwerivier for them. Only three Bromwell Street resident do qualify for subsidised housing. The mayor last week spoke about reversing the apartheid spatial planning in Cape Town. If she meant it, why not start building affordable housing now, she said.Commando said it was shocking that the oldest Bromwell tenant, Brenda Smith, didn t fit the housing subsidy criteria. She s lived here for 75 years and now will be homeless. We don t even mind if the City just gives her a house in Pelican Park. Another resident, Graham Beukes, works just a few metres from his home. He said both of his young children were not at school because it was unclear if they will have to relocate soon. There are about ten school-going children here. They are all worried they will have to move. We don t even know if there will be place for them [at schools] that side. Represented by the Ndifuna Ukwazi Law Centre, Bromwell residents will argue against the proposed relocation to Wolwerivier. They will ask the City to provide them with containers to live on vacant land in Bromwell Street.Mayoral Committee Member for Transport and Urban Development Authority, Brett Herron, said: This case is before the Western Cape High Court. The City will comment once we have argued our case before the court on this day. The matter will be heard in the Western Cape High Court on Tuesday.